---
layout: post
date: 2024-01-06
title: Book Notes - DDIA - Chapter 7. Transactions
tags: book-notes system-design
last_updated: 2024-01-06
status: budding
---

## Chapter 7. Transactions

* A system has to deal with faults in order to be reliable. Implementing fault-tolerance mechanisms is a lot of work.

* Transactions have been the mechanisms of choice for simplifying the fault-tolerance issues. 
  * Conceptually, all the reads and writes in a transaction are executed as one operation: either the transaction succeeds (commit) or it fails (abort, rollback). Application can safely retry if it fails.
  * Safety guarantees: Application is free to ignore certain potential error scenarios and concurrency issues because the database takes care of them.

### Safety guarantees - ACID

* **Atomicity**
  * It is not about concurrency. 
  * Atomicity = abortability = the ability to abort a transaction on error (a fault occurs after some of the writes have been processed) and have all writes from that transaction discarded.
  * Can be implemented using a log for crash recovery.

* **Consistency** 
  * Application-specific notion of a database being in "good state". Application has invariants = certain statements about your data, that must always be true.
  * It is a property of the application unlike other guarantees in ACID. Database cannot guarantee it because the application knows what it's notions are. It is the application's responsibility to define the transactions correctly so that they preserve consistency.
  * Not the same as consistency in replica consistency, CAP theorem or consistent hashing.
  
* **Isolation**
  * Concurrently executing transactions are isolated from each other. Each transaction can pretend it is the only transaction running on the database.
  * Formalized as serializability - database ensures that when the concurrent transactions have committed, the result is the same as if they had run one after the another.
  * Serializable isolation is rarely used in practice due to resulting performance penalty.
  * Can be implemented using a lock on each object - allowing only one thread to access an object at any time.

* **Durability**
  * Once a transaction is committed successfully, the data is persisted even in the cases of faults and crashes.
  * Single-node: Data has been written to a nonvolatile storage. Involves a a write-ahead-log for recovery.
  * Replicated: Data has been successfully copied to some number of nodes.

No one technique can provide absolute guarantees. There are only various risk-reduction techniques.